README.md, before:

# Esparagus Echo

![Open Source Hardware](/images/open-source-hardware-logo.png)
![Open Source Software](/images/open-source-software-logo.png)

<a href="https://www.tindie.com/stores/sonocotta/?ref=offsite_badges&utm_source=sellers_andrey-malyshenko&utm_medium=badges&utm_campaign=badge_medium"><img src="https://d2ss6ovg47m0r5.cloudfront.net/badges/tindie-mediums.png" alt="I sell on Tindie" width="150" height="78"></a>
<br />

[![Dev Chat](https://img.shields.io/discord/1233306441469657140?logo=discord&label=discord&style=flat-square)](https://discord.gg/PtnaAaQMpS)

![DSC_0030](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/04c4431e-0fea-4343-88dc-d94e5a4eb2f3)

Esparagus Echo is a series of two ESP32-S3-based voice control edge devices. They are designed to work with [ESPHome](https://esphome.io) as an edge part of the voice control pipeline. Both devices are enclosed in a neat-looking aluminum case and expose feedback LEDs on the front panel where it is easy to spot them, leaving power and speaker connectors on the backside. 


## Table of Contents

- [Esparagus Echo](#esparagus-echo)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Why Esparagus](#why-esparagus)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Esparagus Solo](#esparagus-solo)
  - [Esparagus Duo](#esparagus-duo)
  - [Features](#features)
  - [Boards Pinout](#boards-pinout)
    - [Peripheral - Common](#peripheral---common)
    - [Peripheral - W5500 Ethernet](#peripheral---w5500-ethernet)
  - [Software](#software)
    - [Home Assistant - media player](#home-assistant---media-player)
    - [Home Assistant - voice assistant](#home-assistant---voice-assistant)
  - [Hardware](#hardware)
    - [Boxed](#boxed)
    - [PCB](#pcb)
  - [Where to buy](#where-to-buy)

## Why Esparagus

The Esparagus Echo design shares a lot with the earlier [Esparagus](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center) series of devices, using similar parts and the same pinout whenever possible. I see this as a side branch of the series, therefore.

## Motivation

I'm a big fan of Alexa. I'm using it around the house, and my family is using it all the time, including 2 years old. However, I do not need to mention privacy concerns, these are quite common. My biggest pain point is the inability to integrate Alexa into the Home Assistant setup that I have at home. I'm a big fan of automation around the house and want to trigger complex flows based on the specific sensors and devices that I have. I think the freedom of the implementation is a bit like the magic of the Home Assistant. Why not have voice control, since everyone around the house is used to it already?

## Esparagus Solo

Esparagus Solo has all the basic necessities, a Mic on the front panel, a couple of feedback LEDs, and a speaker at the back. Onboard is a simple and well-known MAX98357 DAC with a reasonable 5W of output audio. It uses a built-in antenna for simplicity. And that's pretty much it.

![DSC_0006](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bd787b14-6c00-425d-862a-a078a345e4b0)

## Esparagus Duo

On top of Solo capabilities, Esparagus Duo uses a dual Mic setup, extra LED, and most importantly 2-channels MAX98357 channels to deliver quality stereo-audio (and thus can be used as a media player device). To make sure it would stream audio without a hiccup it uses an external Wifi antenna (much-improved perception) and has SPI Ethernet for the most robust networking. 

![DSC_0015](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fa25aedf-96f9-48c8-bf72-99b5bf84d71a)

## Features

|  | Esparagus Solo | Esparagus Duo |
|---|---|---|
| Image | ![DSC_0005](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0c7a3872-1665-4b49-9259-094bfd1093a2) | ![DSC_0031_1](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/41ad38e8-0865-44ec-84eb-abcd57f629fa) |
| MCU | ESP32-S3-WROOM-1-N16R8 module | ESP32-S3-WROOM-1U-N16R8 module |
| MIC | Single [TDK InvenSense ICS-43434](https://invensense.tdk.com/products/ics-43434/) I2S MEMS Mic | Dual [TDK InvenSense ICS-43434](https://invensense.tdk.com/products/ics-43434/) I2S MEMS Mic |
| DAC | Single I2S DAC ([MAX98357](https://www.analog.com/en/products/max98357a.html)) with built-in D-Class amp | Dual I2S DAC ([MAX98357](https://www.analog.com/en/products/max98357a.html)) with built-in D-Class amp |
| Power | 5V from USB-C (Up to 1.5A) | 5V from USB-C (Up to 2.5A) |
| Output, 4Ω | 3W | 2x 3W |
| Output, 8Ω | 5W | 2x 5W |
| PSRAM | 8MB PSRAM | 8MB PSRAM |
| Peripheral | 2x XL1615 RGB LED | 3x XL1615 RGB LED |
| Wireless Connectivity | WiFi + BLE | WiFi + BLE |
| Ethernet | none | Wizznet W5500 SPI Ethernet |
| Size (excl. antenna) | 45 x 18 x 52mm | 70 x 24 x 88 mm |

## Boards Pinout

### Peripheral - Common

|       | I2S CLK | I2S DOUT | I2S DIN | I2S WS | DAC CE | RGB LED
|-------|---------|----------|--------|----------|-----------|-----------|
| Echo Solo | 14      | 16       | 21     | 15       | 17        |  42
| Echo Duo | 14     | 16       | 21     | 15       | 17        | 42


### Peripheral - W5500 Ethernet

|          | SPI CLK  |SPI MOSI| SPI MISO | LAN RES   | LAN CS    | LAN INT   | 
|----------|----------|--------|----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| Echo Duo |  12      |  11    |   13     |  5        |  10       |  6        |

## Software

Since both devices are designed to be primarily used within the Home Assistant setup, the [software](/firmware) folder contains ESPHome configurations for both devices.
- `media-player` is a simple external speaker based on the Arduino framework
- `voice-assistans` is a work-in-progress configuration based on esp-adf pipeline and wake-word detection. 

### Home Assistant - media player

One simple way Esparagus Echo can be used in the Home Assistant is a media player device. [Yaml config](/firmware/esphome) will get you started. Below are configuration steps that you need to do in the HA itself.

| Step | Screenshot |
|------|------------|
| **Add ESPHome Addon** <br/> <br/> Navigate to HA Settings > Addons > Add Addon <br/> Search for SSH and install it.  <br/> Enable `Show in sidebar` switch while you there | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/9d9d0a44-ba2a-491f-bff8-e1c08b8754e0)
| **Prepare Esparagus Echo for ESPHome onboarding** <br/> <br/> Use [Web Flasher](https://web.esphome.io/?dashboard_wizard) to flash stock ESPHome into device | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/8ad222e8-d992-4a75-9a93-596d67ac8cb0)
| **Onboard Esparagus Echo ESPHome device into HA** <br/> <br/> Go to the HA ESPHome page and you should be able to find a new device. You need to onboard it with the below config (feel free to change names) <br/> This will take a moment or two | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/32b0c26a-3be1-4e15-b749-1176d46ff011)
| **Validate device in the ESPHome** | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/92df6029-c777-47ce-8ff9-debec70f7e05)
| **Add ESPHome Integration** <br /> <br/> Navigate to HA Settings > Devices & services > Integrations. Click the big + ADD INTEGRATION button, look for ESPHome, and click to add it. <br/> It should discover and add ESPHome media devices based on the previous step | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/c5d3bb12-8b07-4c49-a9e9-cdf2e6cad8ba)
| **Use your media device in the HA** | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/40067959-04ad-498c-a64d-4353e3f96228)
| **Use your media device in the MA** <br/> <br/> Add Music Assistant HA MediaPlayers provider to discover new Media device | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/6d19a972-83cf-4997-868c-1af0e4175c9b)

### Home Assistant - voice assistant

I will update this section as soon as I get the VA part working.

## Hardware

Please visit [hardware](/hardware/) section for board schematics and PCB designs. Note that PCBs are shared as multi-layer PDFs as well as Gerber archives.

### Boxed

| Esparagus Solo  | Esparagus Duo  | 
|---|---|
| ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b650bccd-84e5-4a5e-81ac-86187e45e2ef) | ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fe4e7137-e51a-4827-b44d-3520adf3159f) 
| ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ad078714-8822-4c29-ad7d-3a537a74fca6) | ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5e5fd427-333e-4336-872e-6a40ef548f83)


### PCB

| Esparagus Solo  | Esparagus Duo  | 
|---|---|
| ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/761b231c-c5f4-4479-b12b-1be4ae2b4831) | ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9561e312-61d7-4463-8947-f37b56da8db0)

## Where to buy

You may support our work by ordering this product at Tindie (soming soon)

Commit message:

Features/rev b docs (#3)
* Rev B update

---------

Co-authored-by: Andriy Malyshenko <andriy@sonocotta.com>

README.md, after:

# Esparagus Echo

![Open Source Hardware](/images/open-source-hardware-logo.png)
![Open Source Software](/images/open-source-software-logo.png)

<a href="https://www.tindie.com/stores/sonocotta/?ref=offsite_badges&utm_source=sellers_andrey-malyshenko&utm_medium=badges&utm_campaign=badge_medium"><img src="https://d2ss6ovg47m0r5.cloudfront.net/badges/tindie-mediums.png" alt="I sell on Tindie" width="150" height="78"></a>
<br />

[![Dev Chat](https://img.shields.io/discord/1233306441469657140?logo=discord&label=discord&style=flat-square)](https://discord.gg/PtnaAaQMpS)

![DSC_0030](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/04c4431e-0fea-4343-88dc-d94e5a4eb2f3)

Esparagus Echo is a series of two ESP32-S3-based voice control edge devices. They are designed to work with [ESPHome](https://esphome.io) as an edge part of the voice control pipeline. Both devices are enclosed in a neat-looking aluminum case and expose feedback LEDs on the front panel where it is easy to spot them, leaving power and speaker connectors on the backside. 


## Table of Contents

- [Esparagus Echo](#esparagus-echo)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Why Esparagus](#why-esparagus)
  - [Motivation](#motivation)
  - [Esparagus Solo](#esparagus-solo)
  - [Esparagus Duo](#esparagus-duo)
  - [Features](#features)
  - [Boards Pinout](#boards-pinout)
    - [Peripheral - Common](#peripheral---common)
      - [Rev A (test samples)](#rev-a-test-samples)
      - [Rev B (distribution)](#rev-b-distribution)
    - [Peripheral - W5500 Ethernet](#peripheral---w5500-ethernet)
  - [Software](#software)
    - [Home Assistant - media player](#home-assistant---media-player)
    - [Home Assistant - voice assistant](#home-assistant---voice-assistant)
  - [Hardware](#hardware)
    - [Boxed](#boxed)
    - [PCB](#pcb)
  - [Where to buy](#where-to-buy)

## Why Esparagus

The Esparagus Echo design shares a lot with the earlier [Esparagus](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center) series of devices, using similar parts and the same pinout whenever possible. I see this as a side branch of the series, therefore.

## Motivation

I'm a big fan of Alexa. I'm using it around the house, and my family is using it all the time, including 2 years old. However, I do not need to mention privacy concerns, these are quite common. My biggest pain point is the inability to integrate Alexa into the Home Assistant setup that I have at home. I'm a big fan of automation around the house and want to trigger complex flows based on the specific sensors and devices that I have. I think the freedom of the implementation is a bit like the magic of the Home Assistant. Why not have voice control, since everyone around the house is used to it already?

## Esparagus Solo

Esparagus Solo has all the basic necessities, a Mic on the front panel, a couple of feedback LEDs, and a speaker at the back. Onboard is a simple and well-known MAX98357 DAC with a reasonable 5W of output audio. It uses a built-in antenna for simplicity. And that's pretty much it.

![DSC_0006](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/bd787b14-6c00-425d-862a-a078a345e4b0)

## Esparagus Duo

On top of Solo capabilities, Esparagus Duo uses a dual Mic setup, extra LED, and most importantly 2-channels MAX98357 channels to deliver quality stereo-audio (and thus can be used as a media player device). To make sure it would stream audio without a hiccup it uses an external Wifi antenna (much-improved perception) and has SPI Ethernet for the most robust networking. 

![DSC_0015](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fa25aedf-96f9-48c8-bf72-99b5bf84d71a)

## Features

|  | Esparagus Solo | Esparagus Duo |
|---|---|---|
| Image | ![DSC_0005](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/0c7a3872-1665-4b49-9259-094bfd1093a2) | ![DSC_0031_1](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/41ad38e8-0865-44ec-84eb-abcd57f629fa) |
| MCU | ESP32-S3-WROOM-1-N16R8 module | ESP32-S3-WROOM-1U-N16R8 module |
| MIC | Single [TDK InvenSense ICS-43434](https://invensense.tdk.com/products/ics-43434/) I2S MEMS Mic | Dual [TDK InvenSense ICS-43434](https://invensense.tdk.com/products/ics-43434/) I2S MEMS Mic |
| DAC | Single I2S DAC ([MAX98357](https://www.analog.com/en/products/max98357a.html)) with built-in D-Class amp | Dual I2S DAC ([MAX98357](https://www.analog.com/en/products/max98357a.html)) with built-in D-Class amp |
| Power | 5V from USB-C (Up to 1.5A) | 5V from USB-C (Up to 2.5A) |
| Output, 4Ω | 3W | 2x 3W |
| Output, 8Ω | 5W | 2x 5W |
| PSRAM | 8MB PSRAM | 8MB PSRAM |
| Peripheral | 2x XL1615 RGB LED | 3x XL1615 RGB LED |
| Wireless Connectivity | WiFi + BLE | WiFi + BLE |
| Ethernet | none | Wizznet W5500 SPI Ethernet |
| Size (excl. antenna) | 45 x 18 x 52mm | 70 x 24 x 88 mm |

## Boards Pinout

### Peripheral - Common

#### Rev A (test samples)

|           | I2S CLK | I2S DOUT | I2S DIN | I2S WS   | DAC CE    | RGB LED
|-----------|---------|----------|---------|----------|-----------|-----------|
| Echo Solo | 14      | 16       | 21      | 15       | 17        |  42
| Echo Duo  | 14      | 16       | 21      | 15       | 17        |  42

#### Rev B (distribution)

|           | I2S CLK (OUT) | I2S DATA (OUT) | I2S WS (OUT) | I2S CLK (IN) | I2S DATA (IN) | I2S WS (IN) | DAC CE | RGB LED |
|-----------|---------------|----------------|--------------|--------------|---------------|-------------|--------|---------|
| Echo Solo | 18            | 17             | 8            | 16           | 15            | 7           |  9     |  42     |
| Echo Duo  | 18            | 17             | 8            | 16           | 15            | 7           |  9     |  42     |


### Peripheral - W5500 Ethernet

|          | SPI CLK  |SPI MOSI| SPI MISO | LAN RES   | LAN CS    | LAN INT   | 
|----------|----------|--------|----------|-----------|-----------|-----------|
| Echo Duo |  12      |  11    |   13     |  5        |  10       |  6        |

## Software

Since both devices are designed to be primarily used within the Home Assistant setup, the [software](/firmware) folder contains ESPHome configurations for both devices.
- `media-player` is a simple external speaker based on the Arduino framework
- `voice-assistans` is a work-in-progress configuration based on esp-adf pipeline and wake-word detection. 

### Home Assistant - media player

One simple way that Esparagus Echo can be used in the Home Assistant is by using a media player device. [Yaml config](/firmware/esphome) will get you started. Below are the configuration steps that you need to do in the HA itself.

| Step | Screenshot |
|------|------------|
| **Add ESPHome Addon** <br/> <br/> Navigate to HA Settings > Addons > Add Addon <br/> Search for SSH and install it.  <br/> Enable `Show in sidebar` switch while you there | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/9d9d0a44-ba2a-491f-bff8-e1c08b8754e0)
| **Prepare Esparagus Echo for ESPHome onboarding** <br/> <br/> Use [Web Flasher](https://web.esphome.io/?dashboard_wizard) to flash stock ESPHome into device | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/8ad222e8-d992-4a75-9a93-596d67ac8cb0)
| **Onboard Esparagus Echo ESPHome device into HA** <br/> <br/> Go to the HA ESPHome page and you should be able to find a new device. You need to onboard it with the below config (feel free to change names) <br/> This will take a moment or two | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/32b0c26a-3be1-4e15-b749-1176d46ff011)
| **Validate device in the ESPHome** | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/92df6029-c777-47ce-8ff9-debec70f7e05)
| **Add ESPHome Integration** <br /> <br/> Navigate to HA Settings > Devices & services > Integrations. Click the big + ADD INTEGRATION button, look for ESPHome, and click to add it. <br/> It should discover and add ESPHome media devices based on the previous step | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/c5d3bb12-8b07-4c49-a9e9-cdf2e6cad8ba)
| **Use your media device in the HA** | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/40067959-04ad-498c-a64d-4353e3f96228)
| **Use your media device in the MA** <br/> <br/> Add Music Assistant HA MediaPlayers provider to discover new Media device | ![image](https://github.com/sonocotta/esparagus-media-center/assets/5459747/6d19a972-83cf-4997-868c-1af0e4175c9b)

### Home Assistant - voice assistant

Originally I had an issue configuring the voice-assistant setup on the echo, despite having good examples shared [here](https://github.com/esphome/firmware/blob/main/voice-assistant) and [here](https://github.com/HA-TB303/ultimatesensor_mini/). The reason for the examples to fail was a single I2S bus handling both audio input and output. In theory, this is a perfectly good configuration, since both DACs and both MICs work in slave mode as they should, and I even made a simple Arduino code that captures frames from MIC and sends them over to the Speakers in stereo mode, working beautifully. 

ESPHome however was not collaborating, so I decided to go with a hardware fix and use extra pins to run independent I2S buses for both MICs and DACs. Note that currently [wakeword](https://www.home-assistant.io/voice_control/install_wake_word_add_on/) does not benefit from the second MIC, but I hope support will be added in the future since Espressiff folks seem to work on that (although they may use external noise-reduction IC, I'm not sure). 

All in all, wakeword started to work in revision B, and although it is not as fast as say, Alexa, it is truly amazing to have it working on such a small device. 

Please look at [this config](/firmware/esphome/echo-duo-b-voice-assist.yaml) to make it work. Note that it will also require to configure Home Assistant properly, you may use [this official guide](https://www.home-assistant.io/voice_control/), [Seeeds docs](https://wiki.seeedstudio.com/respeaker_lite_ha/) or community created [Youtube tutorial](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VAFDgib95Ls)

## Hardware

Please visit [hardware](/hardware/) section for board schematics and PCB designs. Note that PCBs are shared as multi-layer PDFs as well as Gerber archives.

### Boxed

| Esparagus Solo  | Esparagus Duo  | 
|---|---|
| ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b650bccd-84e5-4a5e-81ac-86187e45e2ef) | ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/fe4e7137-e51a-4827-b44d-3520adf3159f) 
| ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/ad078714-8822-4c29-ad7d-3a537a74fca6) | ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5e5fd427-333e-4336-872e-6a40ef548f83)


### PCB

| Esparagus Solo  | Esparagus Duo  | 
|---|---|
| ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/761b231c-c5f4-4479-b12b-1be4ae2b4831) | ![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9561e312-61d7-4463-8947-f37b56da8db0)

## Where to buy

You may support our work by ordering this product at Tindie (coming soon)
